README.md, before:

# WiggleBone Skeleton Modifier for Godot Engine 4.3

Adds jiggle physics to a `Skeleton3D` bone using `SkeletonModifier3D` nodes.

> [!NOTE]
> Requires Godot 4.3. As Godot 4.2 and lower does not support `SkeletonModifier3D` nodes, the branch [godot-4.2](https://github.com/detomon/wigglebone/tree/godot-4.2) has an alternative implementation using `Node3D` and can be used as a fallback for existing projects.

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Wiggle rotation](#wiggle-rotation)
- [Wiggle position](#wiggle-position)
- [Testing in editor](#testing-in-editor)
- [References](#references)

---

![Palm](images/palm.gif)

## Installation

1. Clone this repository or download the archive
2. Copy the folder `addons/wigglebone` to your project's `addons` folder (create it if needed)
3. Enable the plugin in the project settings via the `Plugins` tab

## Usage

You can now add `DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D` or `DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D` nodes to a `Skeleton3D`. See the example scenes in [examples](https://github.com/detomon/wigglebone/tree/master/examples/wigglebone).

**Note:** Poses modified in `SkeletonModifier3D` nodes are only temporary for the current frame. Modifiers for parent bones should come first (above) in the scene tree, otherwise it may have not the desired effect.

> [!WARNING]
> The `WiggleBone` node is deprecated and should be replaced with either `DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D` or `DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D`.

## Wiggle rotation

**DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D**

Rotates the bone around the current bone pose. The current pose direction acts as the spring's rest position.

### Modifier properties

| Property | Description |
|---|---|
| `properties` | Properties used to move the bone. (`DMWBWiggleRotationProperties3D`) |
| `force_global ` | Applies a constant global force. |
| `force_local ` | Applies a constant force relative to the bone's pose. |
| `handle_distance ` | Sets the distance of the editor handle on the bone's Y axis. |

### Property resource

**DMWBWiggleRotationProperties3D**

Used to set the modifier properties. Can be shared by multiple modifiers.

| Property | Description |
|---|---|
| `spring_freq ` | The spring's oscillation frequency. *Note: Adding forces may change the frequency.* |
| `angular_damp` | Damping factor of the angular velocity. |
| `force_scale` | Defines how much the rotation is influenced by forces. |
| `linear_scale` | Defines how much the rotation is influenced by global movement. |
| `swing_span` | Maximum angle the bone can rotate around its pose. |
| `gravity` | Applies a constant global force. |

### Methods

| Method | Description |
|---|---|
| `void reset()` | Reset rotation and angular velocity. |
| `void add_torque_impulse(torque: Vector3)` | Add a global torque impulse. |
| `void add_force_impulse(force: Vector3)` | Add a global force impulse. |

### Free rotation

To allow the bone to rotate freely, the spring frequency (`spring_freq`) can  be set to `0.0` or a very low value.

### Limitations

- Rotations near 180° have a "pole", which means that the bone spins around its forward axis near that limit.
- Rotation with exactly 180° have no unique solution and the bone's forward axis rotation snaps to a fallback axis.
- When the rotation approaches 180° while using a low spring frequency, the angular rotation may change its direction in certain cases.

**Note:** Some of these problems can be avoided by setting the bone pose rotation already to the desired rest position. For example, if a bone is hanging down, the bone pose should already be pointing down.

## Wiggle position

**DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D**

Moves the bone around the current bone pose without rotating. The current pose position acts as the spring's rest position.

### Modifier properties

| Property | Description |
|---|---|
| `properties` | Properties used to move the bone. (`DMWBWigglePositionProperties3D`) |
| `force_global ` | Applies a constant global force. |
| `force_local ` | Applies a constant local force relative to the bone's pose. |

### Property resource

**DMWBWigglePositionProperties3D**

Used to set the modifier properties. Can be shared by multiple modifiers.

| Property | Description |
|---|---|
| `spring_freq ` | The spring's oscillation frequency. *Note: Adding forces may change the frequency.* |
| `linear_damp` | Damping factor of the velocity. |
| `force_scale` | Defines how much the position is influenced by forces. |
| `linear_scale` | Defines how much the position is influenced by global movement. |
| `max_distance` | Maximum distance the bone can move around its pose position. |
| `gravity` | Applies a constant global force. |

### Methods

| Method | Description |
|---|---|
| `void reset()` | Reset position and velocity. |
| `void add_force_impulse(force: Vector3)` | Add a global force impulse. |

## Testing in Editor

When a `DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D` or `DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D` node is selected in the scene tree, a force can be applied to it by dragging its handle. Another way is to drag or rotate the `Skeleton3D` or one of its parents.

### Disabling Editor Gizmo

The editor gizmo (cone/sphere) can be hidden in the 3D viewport by disabling it in `View > Gizmos > DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D` or `View > Gizmos > DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D`, respectively.

## References

### Springs

Based on **Springs: From Hooke's law to a time based equation** by EgoMooses<br>
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZekwtIO0I4>

### Time-independent lerp

**Lerp smoothing is broken** by Freya Holmér<br>
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LSNQuFEDOyQ>

Commit message:

Add install instructions for asset library

README.md, after:

# WiggleBone Skeleton Modifier for Godot Engine 4.3

Adds jiggle physics to a `Skeleton3D` bone using `SkeletonModifier3D` nodes.

> [!NOTE]
> Requires Godot 4.3. As Godot 4.2 and lower does not support `SkeletonModifier3D` nodes, the branch [godot-4.2](https://github.com/detomon/wigglebone/tree/godot-4.2) has an alternative implementation using `Node3D` and can be used as a fallback for existing projects.

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Wiggle rotation](#wiggle-rotation)
- [Wiggle position](#wiggle-position)
- [Testing in editor](#testing-in-editor)
- [References](#references)

---

![Palm](images/palm.gif)

## Installation

1. Search for `wigglebone` in the `AssetLib` editor tab
2. Download and install the plugin
3. Enable the plugin in the project settings via the `Plugins` tab

or...

1. Clone this repository or download the archive
2. Copy the folder `addons/wigglebone` to your project's `addons` folder (create it if needed)
3. Enable the plugin in the project settings via the `Plugins` tab

## Usage

You can now add `DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D` or `DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D` nodes to a `Skeleton3D`. See the example scenes in [examples](https://github.com/detomon/wigglebone/tree/master/examples/wigglebone).

**Note:** Poses modified in `SkeletonModifier3D` nodes are only temporary for the current frame. Modifiers for parent bones should come first (above) in the scene tree, otherwise it may have not the desired effect.

> [!WARNING]
> The `WiggleBone` node is deprecated and should be replaced with either `DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D` or `DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D`.

## Wiggle rotation

**DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D**

Rotates the bone around the current bone pose. The current pose direction acts as the spring's rest position.

### Modifier properties

| Property | Description |
|---|---|
| `properties` | Properties used to move the bone. (`DMWBWiggleRotationProperties3D`) |
| `force_global ` | Applies a constant global force. |
| `force_local ` | Applies a constant force relative to the bone's pose. |
| `handle_distance ` | Sets the distance of the editor handle on the bone's Y axis. |

### Property resource

**DMWBWiggleRotationProperties3D**

Used to set the modifier properties. Can be shared by multiple modifiers.

| Property | Description |
|---|---|
| `spring_freq ` | The spring's oscillation frequency. *Note: Adding forces may change the frequency.* |
| `angular_damp` | Damping factor of the angular velocity. |
| `force_scale` | Defines how much the rotation is influenced by forces. |
| `linear_scale` | Defines how much the rotation is influenced by global movement. |
| `swing_span` | Maximum angle the bone can rotate around its pose. |
| `gravity` | Applies a constant global force. |

### Methods

| Method | Description |
|---|---|
| `void reset()` | Reset rotation and angular velocity. |
| `void add_torque_impulse(torque: Vector3)` | Add a global torque impulse. |
| `void add_force_impulse(force: Vector3)` | Add a global force impulse. |

### Free rotation

To allow the bone to rotate freely, the spring frequency (`spring_freq`) can  be set to `0.0` or a very low value.

### Limitations

- Rotations near 180° have a "pole", which means that the bone spins around its forward axis near that limit.
- Rotation with exactly 180° have no unique solution and the bone's forward axis rotation snaps to a fallback axis.
- When the rotation approaches 180° while using a low spring frequency, the angular rotation may change its direction in certain cases.

**Note:** Some of these problems can be avoided by setting the bone pose rotation already to the desired rest position. For example, if a bone is hanging down, the bone pose should already be pointing down.

## Wiggle position

**DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D**

Moves the bone around the current bone pose without rotating. The current pose position acts as the spring's rest position.

### Modifier properties

| Property | Description |
|---|---|
| `properties` | Properties used to move the bone. (`DMWBWigglePositionProperties3D`) |
| `force_global ` | Applies a constant global force. |
| `force_local ` | Applies a constant local force relative to the bone's pose. |

### Property resource

**DMWBWigglePositionProperties3D**

Used to set the modifier properties. Can be shared by multiple modifiers.

| Property | Description |
|---|---|
| `spring_freq ` | The spring's oscillation frequency. *Note: Adding forces may change the frequency.* |
| `linear_damp` | Damping factor of the velocity. |
| `force_scale` | Defines how much the position is influenced by forces. |
| `linear_scale` | Defines how much the position is influenced by global movement. |
| `max_distance` | Maximum distance the bone can move around its pose position. |
| `gravity` | Applies a constant global force. |

### Methods

| Method | Description |
|---|---|
| `void reset()` | Reset position and velocity. |
| `void add_force_impulse(force: Vector3)` | Add a global force impulse. |

## Testing in Editor

When a `DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D` or `DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D` node is selected in the scene tree, a force can be applied to it by dragging its handle. Another way is to drag or rotate the `Skeleton3D` or one of its parents.

### Disabling Editor Gizmo

The editor gizmo (cone/sphere) can be hidden in the 3D viewport by disabling it in `View > Gizmos > DMWBWiggleRotationModifier3D` or `View > Gizmos > DMWBWigglePositionModifier3D`, respectively.

## References

### Springs

Based on **Springs: From Hooke's law to a time based equation** by EgoMooses<br>
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZekwtIO0I4>

### Time-independent lerp

**Lerp smoothing is broken** by Freya Holmér<br>
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LSNQuFEDOyQ>
